Improve the Basic Authentication section (#26697)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-built-in-authentication.adoc

include::./attributes.adoc[]

The following section describes the Quarkus built-in authentication mechanisms for HTTP-based BASIC, FORM, and both Mutual TLS and proactive authentication.

[[basic-auth]]
== Basic Authentication
 
HTTP Basic authentication (BA) uses fields in the HTTP header, and is the easiest to set up and least resource demanding technique for enforcing access controls to Web resources without requiring HTTP cookies, session identifiers, or login pages.

In the context of an HTTP request, basic access authentication is a method for an HTTP user agent (such as a Web browser) to provide a user name and password when making a request. In basic HTTP authentication, a request contains a header field in the form of _Authorization: Basic_ _<credentials>_, where credentials are the Base64 encoding of a user ID and password joined by a colon. 

> ====

Reviewer: We never used this construct without an admonition type (e.g. `[NOTE]`) so we need to check how it renders on the website.

/cc @ebullient

Reviewer 2: @gsmet Do you mean this one, `_Authorization: Basic_ _<credentials>_` ?
I'd just go for a simple highlighting like `Authorization: Basic <credentials>`

Author: @sberyozkin I think he was talking about the ==== box I used to highlight the example.
The underscores mean a plain italic.

Reviewer: Yes, what @MichalMaler said.

Reviewer 3: `Authorization: Basic <credentials>` should be inline code, rather than italics, I believe. 

Without the type (e.g. NOTE), it is a [simple admonition](https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/blocks/example-blocks/#delimited) that should render as a plain callout box, but we will have to see what the web CSS does with it.

.Example
 
If the user name is `Alice` and the password is `secret`, the HTTP Authorization header will look as `Authorization: Basic  QWxjZTpzZWNyZXQ=`,where `QWxjZTpzZWNyZXQ=` is a Base64 encoded representation of the `Alice:secret; string.
====
 
The BA mechanism does not provide confidentiality protection for the transmitted credentials; they are merely encoded with Base64 when in transit, and not encrypted or hashed in any way. Therefore, basic authentication is typically used with HTTPS to provide confidentiality.
 
[[enabling-basic-auth]]
=== Enabling Basic Authentication
 

> .Prerequisites

Reviewer: Same here, we usually use plain title levels, I have no idea how it renders on the website.

 
* You have installed at least one extension that provides a username/password based `IdentityProvider`, such as xref:security-jdbc.adoc[Elytron JDBC].
 
.Procedure
 
* Enable Basic Authentication (BA) by setting the value of `quarkus.http.auth.basic` property to `true`.
+

> ----

Reviewer: For source code, we enforce:
`[source,<type>]` so in this case `[source,properties]`

include::./attributes.adoc[]

> The following section describes the Quarkus built-in authentication mechanisms for HTTP-based BASIC, FORM, and both Mutual TLS and proactive authentication.

Reviewer 2: The change from `and Mutual TLS authentication as well as the ` to `and both Mutual TLS and proactive authentication` is not quite correct, `proactive authentication` is not a built in mechanism but is about controlling at what point these built in and other authentication mechanisms start working. So I think it needs to be reverted. 
Perhaps we'll move the proactive authentication section to its own doc eventually

Author: Ok, putting it back and removing that proactive mention.

> The following section describes the Quarkus built-in authentication mechanisms for HTTP-based BASIC, FORM, and both Mutual TLS and proactive authentication.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following section describes the Quarkus built-in authentication mechanisms for HTTP-based BASIC, FORM and Mutual TLS authentication. Proactive authentication is also described.
```

Reviewer 2: May be like this ?

> The following section describes the Quarkus built-in authentication mechanisms for HTTP based FORM, BASIC, and Mutual TLS authentication. Proactive authentication is also described.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Explore Quarkus built-in authentication mechanisms and behaviors. Quarkus supports HTTP FORM, BASIC, and Mutual TLS authentication and will proactively authenticate users by default.
```

Do we need words like "the following section" in here at all? In most cases, that scope is clearly implied, making it redundant. This should be a hook: why do I want to read this? The typical (in my past) word for that was "Learn.." but diataxis has a good justification for why that isn't the best choice.

Abstracts are hard, but I would like to use these for the tiles on the website at some point (automagically to reduce manual fiddling), which requires being concise (another reason to remove the "In this document.. " phrasing).

[[basic-auth]]
== Basic Authentication
 

> HTTP Basic authentication (BA) uses fields in the HTTP header, and is the easiest to set up and least resource demanding technique for enforcing access controls to Web resources without requiring HTTP cookies, session identifiers, or login pages.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure having a `BA` acronym is useful, I'd rather remove it

Reviewer: Yeah, tbh, I had the same comment and refrained from doing it. I have never seen it in the wild (I just saw it on the Wikipedia page while checking if it was a thing).

> HTTP Basic Authentication uses fields in the HTTP header and is the easiest to set up. Also, it is one of the least resource-demanding techniques that enforce access controls to the Web resources without requiring HTTP cookies, session identifiers, or login pages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HTTP Basic Authentication uses fields in the HTTP header and is the easiest to set up. Also, it is one of the least resource-demanding techniques that provides user credentials to the secured Web resources without requiring HTTP cookies, session identifiers, or login pages.
```

Reviewer 2: Minor suggestion, since it is a secured Web Resource which enforces the access control, not the actual authentication technique

> In the context of an HTTP request, basic access authentication is a method for an HTTP user agent (such as a Web browser) to provide a user name and password when making a request. In basic HTTP authentication, a request contains a header field in the form of _Authorization: Basic_ _<credentials>_, where credentials are the Base64 encoding of a user ID and password joined by a colon. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the context of an HTTP request, Basic authentication is a method for an HTTP user agent (such as a Web browser) to provide a user name and password when making a request. A request contains a header field in the form of _Authorization: Basic_ _<credentials>_, where credentials are the Base64 encoding of a user ID and password joined by a colon. 
```

Reviewer 2: `Basic authentication` is used everywhere so I propose to use the same phrase. Also, if you don't mind, please change `Basic authentication` to `Basic Authentication`, it seems like the latter option is more frequently used (even in the PR title :-) ) - but I'll leave it up to you

> In the context of an HTTP request, Basic authentication is a method for an HTTP user agent, such as a web browser, to provide a user name and password when creating a request. In Basic HTTP Authentication, a request contains a header field in the form of `Authorization: Basic <credentials>`, where credentials are the Base64 encoding of a user ID and password joined by a colon as described in the following example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the context of an HTTP request, Basic Authentication is a method for an HTTP user agent, such as a web browser, to provide a user name and password when creating a request. In Basic Authentication, a request contains a header field in the form of `Authorization: Basic <credentials>`, where credentials are the Base64 encoding of a user ID and password joined by a colon as described in the following example.
```

====
.Example
 

> If the user name is `Alice` and the password is `secret`, the HTTP Authorization header will look as `Authorization: Basic  QWxjZTpzZWNyZXQ=`,where `QWxjZTpzZWNyZXQ=` is a Base64 encoded representation of the `Alice:secret; string.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the user name is `Alice` and the password is `secret`, the HTTP Authorization header will look as `Authorization: Basic  QWxjZTpzZWNyZXQ=`, where `QWxjZTpzZWNyZXQ=` is a Base64 encoded representation of the `Alice:secret` string.
```

====
 
The BA mechanism does not provide confidentiality protection for the transmitted credentials; they are merely encoded with Base64 when in transit, and not encrypted or hashed in any way. Therefore, basic authentication is typically used with HTTPS to provide confidentiality.
 
[[enabling-basic-auth]]
=== Enabling Basic Authentication

>  

Reviewer 3: Yes. I don't think the intro sentence is necessary

.Prerequisites
 

> * You have installed at least one extension that provides a username/password based `IdentityProvider`, such as xref:security-jdbc.adoc[Elytron JDBC].

Reviewer 2: IMHO the original proposal is correct. Though a `username/password based IdentityProvider` may indeed cause some confusion. So how about `an IdentityProvider which uses a username and password to create a `SecurityIdentity`` ?

> .Procedure

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Community docs do not usually use the word Procedure, as it is a more formal tone than we usually want. Given this has a single step, and is immediately below a heading, I think it can be a simple paragraph

> * Enable Basic Authentication by setting the value of `quarkus.http.auth.basic` property to `true`.

Author: Star is OK here, since we can use it with the procedures with only one step.

> * Enable Basic Authentication by setting the value of `quarkus.http.auth.basic` property to `true`.

Reviewer 3: Again, we use less formal language. Product docs use 'Procedure' traditionally, but that's a less friendly/open tone.

If there is only one step, I think you can skip the bullet entirely.

+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.auth.basic=true
----
 

> For a Basic Auth configuration walkthrough that uses JPA as an alternative technology that works with BA, see the xref:security-getting-started.adoc[Getting Started With Security] guide.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a Basic Authentication configuration walk-through that uses `JPA` see the xref:security-getting-started.adoc[Getting Started With Security] guide.
```
